# Enhancing ICU Patient Recovery: Using LLMs to Assist Nurses in Diary Writing 

S. KERNAN FREIRE, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands<br>M.M.C. VAN MOL, Erasmuc MC, The Netherlands<br>C. SCHOL, Erasmuc MC, The Netherlands<br>E. OZCAN VIEIRA, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands


#### Abstract

Intensive care unit (ICU) patients often develop new health-related problems in their long-term recovery. Health care professionals keeping a diary of a patient's stay is a proven strategy to tackle this but faces several adoption barriers, such as lack of time and difficulty in knowing what to write. Large language models (LLMs), with their ability to generate human-like text and adaptability, could solve these challenges. However, realizing this vision involves addressing several socio-technical and practical research challenges. This paper discusses these challenges and proposes future research directions to utilize the potential of LLMs in ICU diary writing, ultimately improving the long-term recovery outcomes for ICU patients.


## 1 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

Advanced treatments and sophisticated technological interventions in critical care medicine have significantly increased the survival rates of patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). Despite this progress, patients often face various health-related challenges in their long-term recovery $[9,10]$. More than half of patients develop new physical, psychological, and/or cognitive problems following their ICU admission [7], collectively referred to as Post Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS) $[3,25]$.

Family members also experience a stressful period, potentially leading to psychological problems addressed as PICSFamily (PICS-F) [2]. Patient and family-centered care (PFCC) at the ICU, including emotional support and follow-up service, could mitigate the symptoms associated with both PICS and PICS-F. In this study, we explored how an emerging technology, i.e., large language models, could support the emotional well-being of people exposed to critical care.

### 1.1 Emotional recovery following ICU admission, the use of diaries

ICU diaries can be used as part of the PFCC approach, focusing on decreasing symptoms of PICS/PICS-F. These diaries are written in everyday language by healthcare professionals, mostly nurses and family members. Using ICU diaries offers many benefits to all stakeholders involved in the ICU. They contain daily entries detailing the current patient status and descriptions of situations and surroundings. Reading a diary after hospitalization is an effective way of coping with the traumatic aftermath of critical illness, consequently helping to prevent the development of psychological problems [1, 17]. For family members, the diary provides an opportunity to actively care for their loved ones, thus diminishing feelings of powerlessness and reducing psychological problems [19, 22]. Digital diaries were developed during the COVID-19 pandemic, receiving positive assessments from family members [26]. However, implementing digital diaries face some barriers $[6,8]$ as will be explained further.[^0]

### 1.2 Digital diary in the ICU; Barriers in implementation

High-quality PFCC should be considered a fundamental skill for ICU healthcare professionals [12]. However, barriers have been identified, hindering the effective implementation of digital ICU diaries. The main barrier is a lack of time for healthcare professionals [20]. Another barrier is the lack of knowledge among nurses regarding what and how to write in the diary [8]. A potential solution to address these challenges could be the integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the writing process of healthcare professionals.

### 1.3 Large Language Models in Healthcare

Natural language processing (NLP) is a machine learning technique that involves the processing and analysis of text. Large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT, are very effective at generating human-like text. LLMs mark a significant step forward from their predecessors, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Unlike RNNs that process text sequentially and often struggle with long-range dependencies, LLMs can analyze and generate text in parallel, handling extensive context and complex language patterns efficiently [11, 18, 27, 28]. These characteristics make LLMs effective writing partners, helping humans by generating outlines, refining text, and adapting it to the reader.

In healthcare, applications of NLP range from supporting triage by analyzing prior medical notes to answering patients' questions as a chatbot [15]. Recently, LLMs have received widespread attention in healthcare, leading to the creation of health-specific models, such as Med-Palm [24]. Applications include supporting clinical workflow, for example, by generating discharge notes, extracting ecological phenotypes [5], and making medical texts more understandable and empathetic for patients [14]. These capabilities could help tackle challenges nurses face when using digital diaries in the ICU, however, this remains unexplored in the literature [14, 21].

## 2 TOWARDS ICU DIARIES SUPPORTED BY LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS

ICU diaries can provide a more personable timeline for the ICU admission beyond the medical notes that medical professionals already record. Our vision is that an LLM-powered tool can support the writing process for nurses, making it more efficient without losing the personal touch of a human writer. In the following sections, we describe this vision in more detail and the associated research challenges.

### 2.1 Future Vision

We envision a collaborative writing process that evolves as nurses become more familiar with the LLM-powered tool's capabilities, and in turn, the tool "learns" the nurse's writing style. To begin with, nurses may be unfamiliar with the diary writing process for ICU patients. As such, the tool can help nurses figure out what and how to write. At this stage, the tool asks for key information about the situation and generates an example diary entry for the nurse. As the nurse becomes more familiar with the process and expectations, they can start adjusting the entries themselves or write them from scratch. At this stage, the tool can provide in-text suggestions on how to write empathetically and understandably for the patients. Over time, the tool will amass a database of entries about individual patients written by the nurse, allowing the tool to align with their writing style [18]. In turn, the nurse can enter a few keywords to generate a diary entry, saving time. Thus, this collaborative process allows for growth and adaptation both on the human and technological sides.

The tool must support various diary entry themes and modalities, primarily text and images. Prior work by Galazzi et al. [6] has shown that ICU diary entries fall under four main themes with ten sub-themes, namely, Presenting

(Places and people; Diary project), Intensive Care Unit Stay (Clinical events; What the patient does; Patient support), Outside the Hospital (Family and topical events; The weather), Feelings and Thoughts (Encouragement and wishes; Farewell; Considerations). While information about patients' specific ICU experience can only be filled by attending nurses and families, non-patient-related topics, such as the weather and national events, are publicly available via application programming interfaces (APIs). When relevant, the tool could use APIs to enrich the diary entries. Similarly, the tool could access recent entries to the medical documentation records or visitor calendar; however, this poses several technical and ethical challenges as the implications of using LLMs for personal information exchange are not fully understood.

### 2.2 Research Challenges

To realize the vision described above, several socio-technical research challenges must be tackled. These research challenges are discussed under four predefined themes, inspired by prior work that evaluated novel digital tools in support of nurse training [16].

Space and place To better understand the tool's impact on the existing ICU environment, research could empirically evaluate how an LLM-based diary task reduces nurses' daily workload and how it allows for more humanized care.

Technology The technological research challenges revolve around optimizing the LLMs for the tool. Important considerations include using specialized LLMs for different aspects, such as suggestion topics, making entries more empathetic, generating entries based on keywords, and querying APIs. Indeed, the desired tool behavior could be realized by combining several techniques, including fine-tuning models [4], reasoning strategies (e.g., self-discovery [29]), and/or retrieval augmented generation [13]. Several technical limitations may also be imposed due to the ethical concerns of storing and sharing the patients' personal data, for example, the necessity to host LLMs locally in hospitals or at secure providers. Furthermore, it is imperative to identify the risks associated with model hallucinations and bias and how these can be mitigated [21].

Design The tool's design will play a key role in its usability and adoption. Therefore, research should explore options for interaction modalities, how the tool's outputs are displayed (e.g., in-text suggestions), and integrated into the nurses' workflows.

Social factors As with the introduction of any new tool, the end users will likely have several concerns and expectations that should be addressed as early as possible. Therefore, it is important to conduct preliminary research, such as semi-structured interviews and technology probes, to elicit any concerns and requirements from the nurses, patients, and other stakeholders. This will make the tool more socially responsible and human-centered [23].

## 3 CONCLUSION

Large language models have become increasingly popular in the past few years, especially in non-critical contexts. In this study, we explored the potential of LLMs in supporting ICU nurses in writing diary entries for critically ill patients. While this novel technology has much to offer to humanize a highly technological environment, embedding it in nurses' routines seamlessly, LLM-powered tools must be explored thoroughly to understand the socio-technical limitations, opportunities, and risks.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge Kaixin Tang for her graduation project, which inspired this work.

## REFERENCES

[1] Bruna Brandao Barreto, Mariana Luz, Marcos Nogueira de Oliveira Rios, Antonio Alberto Lopes, and Dimitri Gusmao-Flores. 2019. The impact of intensive care unit diaries on patients' and relatives' outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Critical Care 23, 1 (Dec. 2019 ), 411. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-019-2678-0

[2] Jill I. Cameron, Leslie M. Chu, Andrea Matte, George Tomlinson, Linda Chan, Claire Thomas, Jan O. Friedrich, Sangeeta Mehta, Francois Lamontagne, Melanie Levasseur, Niall D. Ferguson, Neill K.J. Adhikari, Jill C. Rudkowski, Hilary Meggison, Yoanna Skrobik, John Flannery, Mark Bayley, Jane Batt, Claudia dos Santos, Susan E. Abbey, Adrienne Tan, Vincent Lo, Sunita Mathur, Matteo Parotto, Denise Morris, Linda Flockhart, Eddy Fan, Christie M. Lee, M. Elizabeth Wilcox, Najib Ayas, Karen Choong, Robert Fowler, Damon C. Scales, Tasnim Sinuff, Brian H. Cuthbertson, Louise Rose, Priscila Robles, Stacey Burns, Marcelo Cypel, Lianne Singer, Cecilia Chaparro, Chung-Wai Chow, Shaf Keshavjee, Laurent Brochard, Paul Hébert, Arthur S. Slutsky, John C. Marshall, Deborah Cook, and Margaret S. Herridge. 2016. One-Year Outcomes in Caregivers of Critically Ill Patients. New England fournal of Medicine 374, 19 (2016), 1831-1841. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1511160 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1511160 PMID: 27168433 .

[3] Judy E. Davidson, Maurene A. Harvey, Jessica Schuller, and Gary Black. 2013. Post-intensive care syndrome: What it is and how to help prevent it. American Nurse Today 8, 5 (May 2013), 32-37. https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE\&sw=w\&issn=19305583\&v=2.1\&it=r\&id=GALE\|A335410359\&sid=googleScholar\&linkaccess=abs Publisher: Healthcom Media.

[4] Ning Ding, Yujia Qin, Guang Yang, Fuchao Wei, Zonghan Yang, Yusheng Su, Shengding Hu, Yulin Chen, Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Jing Yi, Weilin Zhao, Xiaozhi Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, Hai-Tao Zheng, Jianfei Chen, Yang Liu, Jie Tang, Juanzi Li, and Maosong Sun. [n. d.]. Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning of Large-Scale Pre-Trained Language Models. 5, 3 ([n. d.]), 220-235. Issue 3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-023-00626-4

[5] Matthias A. Fink, Arved Bischoff, Christoph A. Fink, Martin Moll, Jonas Kroschke, Luca Dulz, Claus Peter Heußel, Hans-Ulrich Kauczor, and Tim F. Weber. 2023. Potential of ChatGPT and GPT-4 for Data Mining of Free-Text CT Reports on Lung Cancer. Radiology 308, 3 (Sept. 2023), e231362. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.231362 Publisher: Radiological Society of North America.

[6] Alessandro Galazzi, Martina Bruno, Filippo Binda, Giorgia Caddeo, Monica Chierichetti, Paola Roselli, Giacomo Grasselli, and Dario Laquintana. 2023. Thematic analysis of intensive care unit diaries kept by staff: insights for caring. Intensive and Critical Care Nursing 76 (June 2023), 103392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icen.2023.103392

[7] Wytske W. Geense, Marieke Zegers, Marco A. A. Peters, Esther Ewalds, Koen S. Simons, Hester Vermeulen, Johannes G. van der Hoeven, and Mark van den Boogaard. 2021. New Physical, Mental, and Cognitive Problems 1 Year after ICU Admission: A Prospective Multicenter Study. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 203, 12 (June 2021), 1512-1521. https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202009-3381OC Publisher: American Thoracic Society - AJRCCM.

[8] Tineke Haakma, Rob Tieben, Brenda Sleven, Marc Buise, and Margo van Mol. 2022. Experiences of nurses with an innovative digital diary intervention in the intensive care unit: A qualitative exploration. Intensive and Critical Care Nursing 70 (June 2022), 103197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icen. 2022.103197

[9] Margaret S. Herridge and Élie Azoulay. 2023. Outcomes after Critical Illness. New England Journal of Medicine 388, 10 (March 2023), 913-924. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra2104669 Publisher: Massachusetts Medical Society _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra2104669.

[10] Shigeaki Inoue, Junji Hatakeyama, Yutaka Kondo, Toru Hifumi, Hideaki Sakuramoto, Tatsuya Kawasaki, Shunsuke Taito, Kensuke Nakamura, Takeshi Unoki, Yusuke Kawai, Yuji Kenmotsu, Masafumi Saito, Kazuma Yamakawa, and Osamu Nishida. 2019. Post-intensive care syndrome: its pathophysiology, prevention, and future directions. Acute Medicine \& Surgery 6, 3 (2019), 233-246. https://doi.org/10.1002/ams2.415 _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/ams2.415.

[11] Ganesh Jawahar, Benoît Sagot, and Djamé Seddah. 2019. What Does BERT Learn about the Structure of Language?. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 3651-3657. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1356

[12] Jiyeon Kang. 2023. Being devastated by critical illness journey in the family: A grounded theory approach of post-intensive care syndrome-family. Intensive and Critical Care Nursing 78 (Oct. 2023), 103448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iccn.2023.103448

[13] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (NIPS'20). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 793, 16 pages.

[14] Jianning Li, Amin Dada, Behrus Puladi, Jens Kleesiek, and Jan Egger. 2024. ChatGPT in healthcare: A taxonomy and systematic review. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine (Jan. 2024), 108013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2024.108013

[15] Saskia Locke, Anthony Bashall, Sarah Al-Adely, John Moore, Anthony Wilson, and Gareth B. Kitchen. 2021. Natural language processing in medicine: A review. Trends in Anaesthesia and Critical Care 38 (June 2021), 4-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tacc.2021.02.007

[16] Roberto Martinez-Maldonado, Vanessa Echeverria, Gloria Fernandez-Nieto, Lixiang Yan, Linxuan Zhao, Riordan Alfredo, Xinyu Li, Samantha Dix, Hollie Jaggard, Rosie Wotherspoon, Abra Osborne, Simon Buckingham Shum, and Dragan Gašević. 2023. Lessons Learnt from a Multimodal Learning Analytics Deployment In-the-Wild. 31, 1, Article 8 (nov 2023), 41 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3622784

[17] Philippa A. McIlroy, Rebecca S. King, Maité Garrouste-Orgeas, Alexis Tabah, and Mahesh Ramanan. 2019. The Effect of ICU Diaries on Psychological Outcomes and Quality of Life of Survivors of Critical Illness and Their Relatives: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Critical Care Medicine 47, 2 (Feb. 2019), 273. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000003547

[18] Bonan Min, Hayley Ross, Elior Sulem, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Thien Huu Nguyen, Oscar Sainz, Eneko Agirre, Ilana Heintz, and Dan Roth. 2023. Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing via Large Pre-trained Language Models: A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 56, 2, Article 30 (sep 2023), 40 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3605943

[19] Anne H Nielsen and Sanne Angel. 2016. How diaries written for critically ill influence the relatives: a systematic review of the literature. Nursing in Critical Care 21, 2 (2016), 88-96. https://doi.org/10.1111/nicc.12158 _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/nicc.12158.

[20] Peter Nydahl, Carl G Bäckman, Johannes Bereuther, and Michael Thelen. 2014. How much time do nurses need to write an ICU diary? Nursing in Critical Care 19, 5 (2014), 222-227. https://doi.org/10.1111/nicc. 12046 _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/nicc.12046.

[21] Malik Sallam. 2023. ChatGPT Utility in Healthcare Education, Research, and Practice: Systematic Review on the Promising Perspectives and Valid Concerns. Healthcare 11, 6 (Jan. 2023), 887. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11060887 Number: 6 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.

[22] Rachel Schofield, Bridget Dibb, Rebecca Coles-Gale, and Christina J Jones. 2021. The experience of relatives using intensive care diaries: A systematic review and qualitative synthesis. International Journal of Nursing Studies 119 (July 2021), 103927. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2021.103927

[23] Ben Shneiderman. 2022. Human-centered AI. Oxford University Press.

[24] Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S. Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, Perry Payne, Martin Seneviratne, Paul Gamble, Chris Kelly, Abubakr Babiker, Nathanael Schärli, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Philip Mansfield, Dina Demner-Fushman, Blaise Agüera y Arcas, Dale Webster, Greg S. Corrado, Yossi Matias, Katherine Chou, Juraj Gottweis, Nenad Tomasev, Yun Liu, Alvin Rajkomar, Joelle Barral, Christopher Semturs, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Vivek Natarajan. 2023. Large language models encode clinical knowledge. Nature 620, 7972 (Aug. 2023), 172-180. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06291-2 Number: 7972 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

[25] Helle Svenningsen, Leanne Langhorn, Anne Sophie Ågård, and Pia Dreyer. 2017. Post-ICU symptoms, consequences, and follow-up: an integrative review. Nursing in Critical Care 22, 4 (2017), 212-220. https://doi.org/10.1111/nicc.12165 _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/nicc.12165.

[26] Margo M. C. van Mol, Nanda Tummers, Crista Leerentveld, Rob Tieben, and Marc Buise. 2023. The usability of a digital diary from the perspectives of intensive care patients' relatives: A pilot study. Nursing in Critical Care n/a, n/a (2023). https://doi.org/10.1111/nicc.12990 _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/nicc.12990.

[27] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022. Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models. arXiv:2206.07682 [cs.CL]

[28] Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. A Survey of Large Language Models. arXiv:2303.18223 [cs.CL]

[29] Pei Zhou, Jay Pujara, Xiang Ren, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Denny Zhou, Swaroop Mishra, and Huaixiu Steven Zheng. [n. d.]. Self-Discover: Large Language Models Self-Compose Reasoning Structures. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.03620 arXiv:2402.03620 [cs]

This figure "acm-jdslogo.png" is available in "png" format from: http://arxiv.org/ps/2402.15205v1


[^0]:    Authors' addresses: S. Kernan Freire, Delft University of Technology, Landbergstraat 15, Delft, 2628 CE, The Netherlands, s.kernanfreire@tudelft.nl; M.M.C. van Mol, Erasmuc MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, Rotterdam, 3015 GD, The Netherlands, m.vanmol@erasmusmc.nl; C. Schol, Erasmuc MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, Rotterdam, 3015 GD, The Netherlands, c.schol@erasmusmc.nl; E. Ozcan Vieira, Delft University of Technology, Landbergstraat 15, Delft, 2628 CE, The Netherlands, e.ozcan@tudelft.nl.

